# SpacePhysics-DrEmma
This repository is dedicated to research with Dr. Emma in near-Earth space weather physics.

## Background 

High Frequency (HF) radio waves (betweem 3 and 30 MHz) are used in a type of communication typically called shortwave radio to transfer signals beyond the line of sight. This range of frequencies leverages properties of the ionosphere, the ionized layer of the upper atmosphere, to 'skip' or bounce between the Earth and the ionosphere to propagate. Frequencies higher than 30 MHz (VHF and above) tend to go through the ionosphere without enough refraction to bend backwards towards the Earth. This is because the plasma in the ionosphere usually has a lower frequency than VHF waves and the dielectric constant of this plasma is effectively 1, meaning these waves pass through without any noticeable refraction. Though this is neglecting magnetic effects of Earth's field such as Faraday Rotation where these waves are polarized as they pass through the medium and ignoring the presence of electron collisions, it is a rather accurate approximation of what happens on the surface level assuming ideal situations. As such, the ionosphere is a complex and dynamic system, which, depending on its state and the frequency of the radio wave, allows for what is refered to as skywave propagation- or the bouncing of radio waves off the ionosphere. The complexity of this system is not limited to the above mentioned effects. The sun from which energetic particles are constantly being ejected and Earth's magnetic field, which shields us from these particles, are highly dyanmic systems themselves which have a direct effects on the ionosphere. This highlights the multi-dimensionality of the ionosphere as a system that allows for HF propagation and directly impacts it. The purpose of this study is to investigate data from a recently deployed Riometer, an prototype instrument that measures the signal strength of radio waves ranging from 1 to 50 MHz. The enhanced capability of measuring signals at 1 to 20 MHz means the HF band is included in this data. Interestingly enough, there were some radio blackouts at ~8 MHz and below which coincided with a high absorption peak in frequencies above 20 MHz. This project aims to find connections between the HF and VHF bands, which could potentially expose an underlying connection between ionospheric disturbances and ground-wave propagation.


## Reading .txt files

